feat: blog: How to create a custom ESLint rule (#339)
eslint/eslint.org: src/content/drafts/how-to-create-a-custom-eslint-rule.md

### Source File (lib/rules/no-bacon.js)

This is the file where your core code will be. It contains two main pieces:
* A `meta` object that defines high-level details about your rule such as a description of what it does, what type of rule it is, where you can find the docs, etc.
* A `create` function that returns an object that ESLint uses to determine whether or not some piece of code violates the rule or not. 

More details about all of the flags and options can be found in the [rule-basics](https://eslint.org/docs/latest/developer-guide/working-with-rules#rule-basics) section of the ESLint docs.

For now, let's briefly talk through each of these pieces. I'll start by showing you some code, and then I'll talk through what each line does (you can find the gist for entire file [here](https://gist.github.com/mike-solomon/1f191393b5bef696937409491c8c559b) if that's easier). 

#### Meta Section

For the bacon example, the `meta` section would look like:

{% highlight "javascript" %}

> {% raw %}

Author: I had to do highlighting like this a few times in this PR as when I tried the normal triple backticks, it stopped updating the site and threw parsing errors.

Reviewer: because of this `{{identifier}}` template it is breaking I guess.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I believe you can use triple backticks and just use the raw block around `{{identifier}}`.

If you want to learn more about what flags and settings exist, please read the  [ESLint Rule Basics](https://eslint.org/docs/latest/developer-guide/working-with-rules#rule-basics) guide.

#### Context Function

For the bacon example, the `context` function would look like: 

{% highlight "javascript" %}
{% raw %}
create(context) {
  return {
    Identifier(node) {
      const identifier = node.name;

      if (identifier.toLowerCase().includes("bacon")) {
        context.report({
          node: node,
          messageId: 'avoidBacon',
          data: {
            identifier
          }
        });
      }
    }
  };
},
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}

All rules need to have a `create(context)` in them. What's inside of there, though, is where the differences lie. Let's talk through a few key pieces:

> * The `create(context)` function needs to return an object that ESLint calls to "visit" each of the nodes while traversing the tree. The simplest rules, like our bacon one, return an object that specifies a specific type of node and then runs some if statement s to check whether or not the rule is violated. More advanced rules will provide many different types of nodes and functions in combination.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `create(context)` function needs to return an object that ESLint calls to "visit" each of the nodes while traversing the tree. The simplest rules, like our bacon one, return an object that specifies a specific type of node and then runs some if statements to check whether or not the rule is violated. More advanced rules will provide many different types of nodes and functions in combination.
```

### Source File (lib/rules/no-bacon.js)

This is the file where your core code will be. It contains two main pieces:

* A `meta` object that defines high-level details about your rule such as a description of what it does, what type of rule it is, where you can find the docs, etc.
* A `create` function that returns an object that ESLint uses to determine whether or not some piece of code violates the rule or not. 

More details about all of the flags and options can be found in the [rule-basics](https://eslint.org/docs/latest/developer-guide/working-with-rules#rule-basics) section of the ESLint docs.

For now, let's briefly talk through each of these pieces. I'll start by showing you some code, and then I'll talk through what each line does (you can find the gist for entire file [here](https://gist.github.com/mike-solomon/1f191393b5bef696937409491c8c559b) if that's easier). 

#### Meta Section

For the bacon example, the `meta` section would look like:

```javascript

> meta: {

Reviewer 2: This is technically invalid JS syntax, which may confuse some readers. Can we build this out a bit?

```js
module.exports = {
   meta: {
       ...
    },
   create(context) {
      // omitted for clarity
    }

};
```

* The `messages` key (line 12) is a way of providing one or more warnings / errors for the user. By defining these here, it makes it so you don't have to copy the same message to many different files or locations. For instance, the tests I wrote above only have to reference the key of `avoidBacon` instead of copying the entire message to that file.
* In the `avoidBacon` message (line 13), you can see that I have `identifier` surrounded by double brackets. By enclosing a variable name in double brackets like this, I'm telling ESLint that this warning message expects a variable called `identifier` to be passed in. I'll need to add that in the context section below. You can use this to provide better error messages to your users.

If you want to learn more about what flags and settings exist, please read the  [ESLint Rule Basics](https://eslint.org/docs/latest/developer-guide/working-with-rules#rule-basics) guide.

#### Context Object

For the bacon example, the `context` object would look like: 

```javascript

> create(context) {

Reviewer 2: This is technically invalid JavaScript syntax. Can you flesh out this section by doing something like:

```js
module.exports = {
    // meta omitted for clarity
   create(context) {
      ...
    }

};
```

  return {

>     Identifier(node) {

Reviewer 2: One thing to keep in mind with this approach is that it will also flag something like this:

```js
let a = bacon;
```

In this case, you're not creating an identifier named `bacon`, but rather consuming one that you may not be able to change.

Can you add a note calling this out?

Author: Ooh that's a great call. Thanks!

      const identifier = node.name;

      if (identifier.toLowerCase().includes("bacon")) {
        context.report({
          node: node,
          messageId: 'avoidBacon',
          data: {
            identifier
          }
        });
      }
    }
  };
},
```

> All rules need to have a `create(context)` in them. What's inside of there, though, is where the differences lie. Let's talk through a few key pieces:

Reviewer 2: What we're really talking about is having a particular method.
```suggestion
All rules need to have a `create()` method. What's inside of the method, though, is where the differences lie. Let's talk through a few key pieces:
```

> * The `create(context)` object is an object that ESLint uses when it "visits" each of the nodes while traversing the tree. The simplest rules, like our bacon one, specify a specific type of node and then run some if statements to check whether or not the rule is violated. More advanced rules will provide many different types of nodes and functions in combination.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The object returned from the `create()` method tells ESLint which nodes the rule is interested in. When ESLint traverses an AST, it stops on the specified nodes to run the code from your rule. The simplest rules, like our bacon one, specify one specific type of node and then run some `if` statements to check whether or not the rule is violated. More advanced rules will provide many different types of nodes and functions in combination.
```

>   * Remember earlier how you used the AST Explorer to get a better understanding of how code is broken down? You'll now put that to use here by typing something like: `Identifier(node) {}` and then adding some code for parsing whatever object you went with inside of the brackets.

Reviewer 2: I'm not quite sure what you're saying here. "Creating something like" is a bit confusing because we are using a specific example in the post. Also the phrase "parsing whatever object" is incorrect (you can't parse objects, you can parse strings), so I'm not entirely sure what it is you're trying to say here. Do you mean that you can look at the node that was passed in to determine if your rule passes?

Author: Apologies for the confusion. My intention was to call out that the `Identifier(node) {}` is something that would be changed depending on the rule. So if someone was wanting a rule about functions, they wouldn't use the `Identifier` part of things.

I'll re-write the section to try and make it clearer.

> * `context.report()` is how you let ESLint know that something violated the rule. In there, you'll want to provide a `node` object and a `messageId` that has the same key as the one in the `meta` section. You can also provide extra data so the user has a better idea of what went wrong (such as by showing them the identifier that has bacon in it).

Reviewer 2: "In there" is a bit vague.

```suggestion
* `context.report()` is how you let ESLint know that something violated the rule. When you call `context.report()`, you'll want to provide a `node` object and a `messageId` that has the same key as the one in the `meta` section. You can also provide extra data so the user has a better idea of what went wrong (such as by showing them the identifier that has bacon in it).
```

> If you want a more detailed look into everything around this `context` object, please read the [ESLint Context Object docs](https://eslint.org/docs/latest/developer-guide/working-with-rules#the-context-object).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want a more detailed look into everything around the `context` object, please read the [ESLint Context Object docs](https://eslint.org/docs/latest/developer-guide/working-with-rules#the-context-object).
```

* If this rule **is** specific to your company:
  * Is it specific to a single project?
  * Is it something that many different projects could benefit from?
* If this rule **isn't** specific to your company:
  * Is it something that benefits *all* JavaScript projects or is it more specific than that? For example, a rule that provides suggestions for TypeScript apps that use GitHub would be something that is beneficial for some projects, whereas a rule that suggests to not use `console.log` would be beneficial for all types of projects. 

Once you have those answers you can then think about...

## Where will the code for the rule live?

There are four main places that new rules are commonly made:

1. In the core [ESLint repository](https://github.com/eslint/eslint/tree/main/lib/rules) 
    * *For rules that are useful to all JavaScript projects*
2. In a plugin that already exists 
    * *For rules that are useful to a specific subset of JavaScript projects*
3. In a new plugin 
    * *For rules that are useful to a specific subset of JavaScript projects, but that don't fit into any existing plugin*

> 4. Locally in a specific project by utilizing the plugin [eslint-plugin-local-rules](https://www.npmjs.com/package/eslint-plugin-local-rules) 

Reviewer 2: You don't actually need to use a plugin to use a local rule. You can use the deprecated `--rulesdir`, but also, you can create a local plugin and reference it in your dependencies using the [`file:` prefix](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/14381898/local-dependency-in-package-json/14387210#14387210).

    * *For rules that should remain local and / or don't need to be shared*

*Note*: A plugin is a way of sharing rules that relate to a specific type of project. Installing a plugin **does not** turn on all the rules in it. Rather, it just adds more rules that you can choose to apply or not.

I won't go into more detail about what plugins are or how to make them in this article. Instead, I'll focus on showing you how to make a rule in either the core ESLint repository or in a plugin that already exists. If you want to learn more about how to make plugins, though, please check out the [Working with Plugins](https://eslint.org/docs/latest/developer-guide/working-with-plugins) guide on the ESLint website. 

## How does ESLint parse code?

The last thing you need to think about before coding your rule is the topic of parsing code. It's easy for us, as humans, to think, "Oh, I don't want any identifiers with bacon in them." Computers, unfortunately, are not that simple. They need ways to programmatically define what is an identifier vs. a function declaration vs. a literal and so on. 

> Fret not, though, as most of this work has already been done for us. ESLint uses something called [ESTree](https://github.com/estree/estree) to parse code. You can think of it as a way of breaking up code into a giant tree that ESLint can then iterate over to check things. 

Reviewer 2: Technically, ESTree is the AST format that ESLint uses, so it can't parse code.

ESLint uses a parser (called Espree) that parses JavaScript code into an ESTree-compatble AST format.

So Espree is the parser, ESTree is the AST format, and ESLint is the tool that uses Espree to create the AST. (Though ESLint can also use other parsers like babel/eslint-parser, Espree is the one it ships with.)

> There's some [extensive documentation](https://web.archive.org/web/20210314002546/https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Projects/SpiderMonkey/Parser_API#node_objects) you can check out that shows all the different types of nodes that code can be broken up into -- but an even easier way is to use the [AST Explorer](https://astexplorer.net/).

Reviewer 2: We should use the spec at https://github.com/estree/estree for this.

> The [AST Explorer](https://astexplorer.net/) lets you paste in JavaScript code and then shows you exactly what this tree looks like. You can click on any particular piece of code and you'll see the keys and values for it on the right side of the page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[AST Explorer](https://astexplorer.net/) lets you paste in JavaScript code and then shows you exactly what this tree looks like. You can click on any particular piece of code and you'll see the keys and values for it on the right side of the page.
```

For the bacon example, let's copy over two lines to take a look at:

```javascript
let pork = "Meow";
function bacon() {};
```

> If you click on `let`, you should see a `VariableDeclaration` section highlighted on the right side. Likewise, if you click on `function`, you should see a `FunctionDeclaration` highlighted. But what if you click on `pork` or `bacon`? Fortunately for us, both of those cases show that `Identifier` is highlighted (See Figure 1).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you click on `let` in the code section of AST Explorer, you should see a `VariableDeclaration` section highlighted on the right side. Likewise, if you click on `function`, you should see a `FunctionDeclaration` highlighted. But what if you click on `pork` or `bacon`? Fortunately for us, both of those cases show that `Identifier` is highlighted (See Figure 1).
```

![Figure 1: AST Identifier Example](/assets/images/blog/2022/eslint-ast-example.png)
*Figure 1: What an identifier in an Abstract Syntax Tree looks like*

This piece is exactly what you'll need to begin coding the bacon rule. You can see that if you find an `Identifier`, you can check for the `name` and see if it violates the bacon restrictions. 

> If you visit the [Parser API](https://web.archive.org/web/20210314002546/https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Projects/SpiderMonkey/Parser_API#miscellaneous) docs, you can see that `Identifiers` do indeed have a `name` field that is a `string` -- which matches what we saw above.

Reviewer 2: Again, let's refer to the ESTree spec here.

Take some time to explore what code translates to what nodes by copying / pasting in various chunks of code that relate to the rule you're trying to make. This will make it easier for you when you go to write the code for the rule.

## Generate the files

It's now time to go about actually making your rule. (Yay!) Each rule in ESLint has three files named with its identifier. 

> *Note*: An identifier is a short, high-level description of the rule separated by dashes.

Reviewer 2: I think you can pull this in as the last sentence of the previous paragraph.

For the bacon example, the identifier could be something like `no-bacon`. In which case the three files would be:

1. `tests/lib/rules/no-bacon.js` -- A test file where you will test the rule to make sure it works as expected. I'd recommend you begin by writing this before you write your source file.
2. `lib/rules/no-bacon.js` -- The source file where you will write the core logic of the rule.
3. `docs/rules/no-bacon.md` -- A Markdown file that explains what your rule does. It largely will contain the answers to the questions discussed above.

> **Before examining each file, there's a few important links you should be aware of**:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Before examining each file, there are a few important links you should be aware of**:
```

> * ESLint provides a [Working with Rules](https://eslint.org/docs/latest/developer-guide/working-with-rules) guide on their website that goes into a lot of detail about each of the files and what every property is. It's something you'll definitely want to check out when you start making your own rules.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* ESLint provides a [Working with Rules](https://eslint.org/docs/latest/developer-guide/working-with-rules) guide that goes into a lot of detail about each of the files and what every property is. It's something you'll definitely want to check out when you start making your own rules.
```

* There is a [Yeoman](https://yeoman.io/) generator that aids in the creation of plugins and rules that you can find [here](https://github.com/eslint/generator-eslint). Once installed, it'll ask you a series of questions and then generate all of the files in the correct spots for you -- with much of the core code set up for you. I found it really useful in helping me get started with rules. 

### Test File (tests/lib/rules/no-bacon.js)

The Test File is what I'd recommend starting with. If you've followed along with the guide so far, the work you did earlier on deciding what will make your rule pass / fail can be used here. In fact the test file will consist almost entirely of those examples!

To begin your test file, you'll want to import your rule and the ESLint `RuleTester`:

```javascript
const rule = require("../../../lib/rules/no-bacon");
const RuleTester = require("eslint").RuleTester;
```

From there, you'll want to create your own `ruleTester` object that you can use to run your test cases. You can provide it with options that will act as defaults for all the test cases. 

> For instance, the `RuleTester`, by default, uses [ECMA Version 5](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_es5.asp). If you're used to modern JavaScript, some of your test cases might not work. To fix that, you can specify `parserOptions` when you make this tester so that all your tests use ECMA Version 6 instead:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For instance, the `RuleTester`, by default, uses ECMAScript 5. If you're used to modern JavaScript, some of your test cases might not work. To fix that, you can specify `parserOptions` when you make this tester so that all your tests use ECMAScript 6 instead by using the `ecmaVersion` option:
```

* The `messages` key (line 12) is a way of providing one or more warnings / errors for the user. By defining these here, it makes it so you don't have to copy the same message to many different files or locations. For instance, the tests I wrote above only have to reference the key of `avoidBacon` instead of copying the entire message to that file.
* In the `avoidBacon` message (line 13), you can see that I have `identifier` surrounded by double brackets. By enclosing a variable name in double brackets like this, I'm telling ESLint that this warning message expects a variable called `identifier` to be passed in. I'll need to add that in the context section below. You can use this to provide better error messages to your users.

If you want to learn more about what flags and settings exist, please read the  [ESLint Rule Basics](https://eslint.org/docs/latest/developer-guide/working-with-rules#rule-basics) guide.

> #### Context Function

Reviewer 2: You are using "Context function" throughout, but it should be "the context argument" or "the context object."

For the bacon example, the `context` function would look like: 

```javascript
create(context) {
  return {
    Identifier(node) {
      const identifier = node.name;

      if (identifier.toLowerCase().includes("bacon")) {
        context.report({
          node: node,
          messageId: 'avoidBacon',
          data: {
            identifier
          }
        });
      }
    }
  };
},
```

All rules need to have a `create(context)` in them. What's inside of there, though, is where the differences lie. Let's talk through a few key pieces:

> * The `create(context)` function needs to return an object that ESLint calls to "visit" each of the nodes while traversing the tree. The simplest rules, like our bacon one, return an object that specifies a specific type of node and then runs some if statements to check whether or not the rule is violated. More advanced rules will provide many different types of nodes and functions in combination.

Reviewer 2: Technically, the methods on the object are called, not the object itself.

```javascript
let bacona = "hello";
console.log(bacon);
function baConstructor() {};
function validName(bacon) {};
class someBaconClass {};
```

Here are some examples that would cause this rule to **pass** (meaning no warning):

```javascript
let pork = 1;
console.log('bacon');
function ba_con() {};
class b4c0n {};
```

## Who will benefit from this rule?

Now that you have some idea of how your rule will work, you should take some time to think about who would benefit from this rule. Some questions to ask yourself are:

* Is this a rule that would benefit just your company or is it something that other people might want?
* If this rule **is** specific to your company:
  * Is it specific to a single project?
  * Is it something that many different projects could benefit from?
* If this rule **isn't** specific to your company:
  * Is it something that benefits *all* JavaScript projects or is it more specific than that? For example, a rule that provides suggestions for TypeScript apps that use GitHub would be something that is beneficial for some projects, whereas a rule that suggests to not use `console.log` would be beneficial for all types of projects. 

> Once you have those answers, you can then think aboutv where the code for this rule will live.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once you have those answers, you can then think about where the code for this rule will live.
```

The last thing you need to think about before coding your rule is the topic of parsing code. It's easy for us, as humans, to think, "Oh, I don't want any identifiers with bacon in them." Computers, unfortunately, are not that simple. They need ways to programmatically define what is an identifier vs. a function declaration vs. a literal and so on. 

Fret not, though, as most of this work has already been done for us. ESLint uses [Espree](https://github.com/eslint/espree) to parse JavaScript code into an [ESTree](https://github.com/estree/estree)-compatible format. You can think of it as a way of breaking up code into a giant tree that ESLint can then iterate over to check things. 

There's some [extensive documentation](https://github.com/estree/estree#ast-descriptor-syntax) you can check out that shows all the different types of nodes that code can be broken up into -- but an even easier way is to use the [AST Explorer](https://astexplorer.net/).

> [AST Explorer](https://astexplorer.net/) lets you paste in JavaScript code and then shows you exactly what this tree looks like. You can click on any particular piece of code and you'll see the keys and values for it on the right side of the page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
AST Explorer lets you paste in JavaScript code and then shows you exactly what this tree looks like. You can click on any particular piece of code and you'll see the keys and values for it on the right side of the page.
```

Reviewer 2: Since we already have a link in the preceding sentence.

function bacon() {};
```

> If you click on `let` in the code section of the AST explorer, you should see a `VariableDeclaration` section highlighted on the right side. Likewise, if you click on `function`, you should see a `FunctionDeclaration` highlighted. But what if you click on `pork` or `bacon`? Fortunately for us, both of those cases show that `Identifier` is highlighted (See Figure 1).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you click on `let` in the code section of AST Explorer, you should see a `VariableDeclaration` section highlighted on the right side. Likewise, if you click on `function`, you should see a `FunctionDeclaration` highlighted. But what if you click on `pork` or `bacon`? Fortunately for us, both of those cases show that `Identifier` is highlighted (See Figure 1).
```

![Figure 1: AST Identifier Example](/assets/images/blog/2022/eslint-ast-example.png)
*Figure 1: What an identifier in an Abstract Syntax Tree looks like*

This piece is exactly what you'll need to begin coding the bacon rule. You can see that if you find an `Identifier`, you can check for the `name` and see if it violates the bacon restrictions. 

> If you visit the [ES5 Spec](https://github.com/estree/estree/blob/master/es5.md#identifier), you can see that `Identifiers` do indeed have a `name` field that is a `string` -- which matches what we saw above.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you visit the [ESTree Specification](https://github.com/estree/estree/blob/master/es5.md#identifier), you can see that `Identifiers` do indeed have a `name` field that is a `string` -- which matches what we saw above.
```

Take some time to explore what code translates to what nodes by copying / pasting in various chunks of code that relate to the rule you're trying to make. This will make it easier for you when you go to write the code for the rule.

## Generate the files

> It's now time to go about actually making your rule. (Yay!) Each rule in ESLint has three files named with its identifier. *Note*: An identifier is a short, high-level description of the rule separated by dashes.

Reviewer 2: We can just let this be part of the paragraph.

```suggestion
It's now time to go about actually making your rule. (Yay!) Each rule in ESLint has three files named with its identifier. A rule identifier is a short, high-level description of the rule in dash-case, such as `prefer-const`.
```
